---
title: "CDS 130: Computing for Scientists"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/CDS130
venue: "George Mason University, Computational Social Science Department"
date: 2019-01-26
location: "Fairfax, Virginia"
---

* Spring-2019
* Fall-2019
* Spring-2020

Course Description: CDS-130 teaches the fundamentals of data representation, image processing, and
computational modeling, and also introduces students to important topics in computational
mathematics. This class is part of the Mason Core, specifically, it meets the
Information Technology and Computing requirements. Information technology and computing
can significantly augment humans' ability to produce, consume, process, and communicate
information. Thus, students need to understand ways to use such technology to enhance their
lives, careers, and society, while being mindful of challenges such as security, source reliability,
automation, and ethical implications. These factors have made it essential for students to
understand how to effectively navigate the evolving technological landscape. IT courses offered
in the majors may focus on disciplinary applications and concerns of information technology.
IT courses meet the following learning outcomes:
1. Students will understand the principles of information storage, exchange, security, and
privacy and be aware of related ethical issues.
2. Students will become critical consumers of digital information; they will be capable of
selecting and evaluating appropriate, relevant, and trustworthy sources of information.
3. Students can use appropriate information and computing technologies to organize and
analyze information and use it to guide decision-making.
4. Students will be able to choose and apply appropriate algorithmic methods to solve a
problem.
5. Translate computational thinking into programmable processes using MATLAB® computing framework. Students will learn to think computationally about the world around them. This is novel for most students, and thus, will require thought and work. Students will learn to construct computational models of natural phenomena using MATLAB.
