---
title: "Computational Modeling of the Social Complexity in Göbekli Tepe and Earliest Neolithic Communities"
collection: talks
type: "PhD Dissertation Defense"
permalink: /talks/PhD-2024
venue: "Center for Social Complexity, George Mason University"
date: 2024-04-11
location: "Fairfax, Virginia"
---

For years, we believed that the transformation of human communities from simple nomadic hunter-gatherer societies to complex sedentary societies occurred due to the expansion of cultivation and the rise of agriculture. Accepting this perspective as premise to years of archaeological research limited the field in investigating alternative explanations to the significant socio-cultural transition which potentially led to years of collaborative efforts in the Mesopotamian region of West Asia. Göbekli Tepe, a pre-pottery Neolithic site in Turkey, requires such alternative explanations for the Neolithic Revolution. Since the site was discovered, various excavations and analyses have been conducted. However, all such investigations include traditional archaeological methods and expectations. This research proposes a multidisciplinary theory of the development of the social complexity of Göbekli Tepe and the contemporary communities in the Urfa region prior to the rise of agriculture. Understanding the interplay of factors resulting in group identity and social cohesion shed light on the reasons that motivated the collective action of hunter-gatherer societies of the region to construct this communal space for ritualistic purposes. This research, rooted in complex system theory, pioneers a novel exploration of the nonlinear dynamics of humanhuman and human-environment interactions among Neolithic communities. Utilizing a
multi-method computational approach, it delves into group identity and social cohesion, departing from prior studies confined to single quantitative methods. The study employs quantitative and qualitative socio-cultural and environmental data to construct an artificial
society, unveiling nuanced factors shaping interactions. Through agent-based modeling and social network analysis, it sheds light on the dynamics of trust, cooperation, leadership emergence, belief propagation, and universal narratives, offering insights into historical and
contemporary societal behaviors.

The model underwent continuous testing during implementation to ensure replicability of observed data, with a conceptualization involving three phases: agent-environmental dynamics, agent behavior, and analysis and interpretation of outcomes. Phase I focuses on agent dynamics during hunting and gathering, addressing survival, prosperity, and subsistence patterns, utilizing diverse data sources for model design. Phase II introduces sociopsychological elements like trust and cooperation, enhancing complexity and discovery pace. In phase III, results are analyzed to reveal patterns and insights on Göbekli Tepe’s dynamics, including group identity, social cohesion, and belief propagation. Social network analysis
quantifies structural cohesion, identifies leaders, explores group identity factors, and compares parameters affecting subsistence patterns, combining socio-cultural factors influencing decision-making and adaptive behavior.

Justified results include (i) demonstration of a consistent shift from hunting to gathering in simulated societies, showcasing adaptability and resilience, with insights into potential agricultural emergence from extended wild grain gatherings; (ii) improved understanding of the essential role of trust and cooperation in community formation among hunter-gatherers, impacting network connectivity and emphasizing their influence on the construction of Göbekli Tepe and early human societies; (iii) novel findings that suggest belief propagation in Neolithic communities, indicating a shared belief system’s crucial role in fostering collective identity and influencing the emergence of leaders, contributing to monumental construction at Göbekli Tepe; and, (iv) exploration of the development of universal narratives, demonstrating that trust thresholds influence narrative attachment growth, providing insights into symbolic motivations behind hunter-gatherer monumental structures and emphasizing storytelling’s pivotal role in fostering extensive cooperation.

This dissertation’s research, grounded in complex system theory, innovatively integrates computational methods to explore group identity and social cohesion among Neolithic communities, surpassing prior studies relying on single quantitative methods. The consistent patterns across experiments demonstrate the adaptive resilience of simulated societies transitioning to gathering. Trust emerges as a crucial factor influencing cooperation, social cohesion, and group identity, with implications for modern societal dynamics and policymaking. The study also delves into the emergence of leaders and belief propagation dynamics, offering insights relevant to historical and contemporary societal behaviors. This interdisciplinary computational approach advances scientific understanding, with potential applications in anthropology, archaeology, and policy-making. Collaboration with the Göbekli Tepe archaeological team enhances study validity, fostering international research partnerships and future discoveries.
